---
layout: "post"
title: "In Memoriam: Keith Levene (The Clash, Public Image Limited)"
date: 2022-11-13
categories:
  - music
---
Yesterday I learned one of my favorite guitar players is gone: Keith
Levene, founding member of The Clash and Public Image Ltd, just [died of
liver
cancer](https://www.rollingstone.com/music/music-news/keith-levene-the-clash-public-image-ltd-guitarist-dead-obit-1234630011/),
at age 65. While I\'m old enough to already have my share of dead
heroes, I find myself strangely affected by his death. Strange since
it\'s not like Levene has been on my mind constantly. I don\'t have his
poster on the wall. I don\'t think of him every time I pick up the
guitar. I hadn\'t even known he was a founding member of The Clash.

No, for years I\'ve known Levene as the brilliant, abrasive guitarist
for Public Image Limited (PiL), the band he co-founded with John Lydon
(fka Johnny Rotten of the Sex Pistols) in 1978. Way more people know the
Sex Pistols, and a few might only know PiL as Johnny Rotten\'s other
band. But I\'m certainly not alone in my belief that of the two,
Public Image Ltd was the one artistically worth a damn. As a few YouTube
commentators have pointed out: Public Image Ltd, at their early peak
before Levene left the band, sounded like the future. And I think Levene
is the reason why.

A note about the electric guitar: While revolutionary upon arrival, over
the decades the electric guitar has become nearly as ossified an
instrument as the violin or the cello. At first electric guitar players
were breaking all the rules, or rather making up new rules as they went
along: Slicing their speaker cones, using thinner strings to bend notes,
abusing tremolo bars. Think Hendrix.

But that\'s no longer the case. There is now the inevitable established
canon of tracks and styles to learn. There are agreed-upon rules for
approaching the guitar. Every time you play most people listening
already have a set of pre-conceived notions of how the guitar should
sound, and by extensions how *you* should sound. While it\'s especially
bad now, this was already the case in the 70s, after rock music had
spent over a decade as a dominant commercial force.

So to pick up the guitar and do something truly unique is a difficult
artistic feat. It\'s the Jackson Pollock thing: Anyone can splash paint
on a canvass, but only Pollock could make it work like he did,
developing an artistic language all his own.

I\'ve been playing guitar for almost twenty years now. I\'ll let you in
on a secret: Playing conventional classic rock guitar isn\'t hard at
all. It\'s actually very fucking easy to learn the minor pentatonic
scale and scribble within the lines over any anonymous backing track on
YouTube. You can learn AC/DC riffs, Led Zeppelin, whatever, and impress
someone. Gratification is never far off. It\'s amusing for a while, and
if you\'re really good, you can become a street performer, or join a bar
band, or even tour with Wolfmother. But you\'re not going to become
Jackson Pollock. And at this point, you\'re even further away from being
an artist than before you learned to play guitar in the first place.

Keith Levene, though, could do something different with the guitar. No
small feat. To use this instrument to make sounds that are fresh and
mind-bending requires a degree of individualism, perseverance, and
discernment that I think is nearly extinct in the guitar-playing masses
of today and was always in short supply to begin with. The sounds Levene
made with the guitar were haunting, frightening, visceral. His tone was
ice-pick sharp, metallic. It\'s not technically difficult to play the
chords he played, but it\'s extremely difficult to play outside the
lines like he did. Levene chose the wrong notes on purpose, something
that guitar players like me spend a whole lifetime running away from.
And upon hearing him play many people, maybe even most people, would frown. 
But it gives a few of us an enormous smile.

Ok, so Levene played weird. Who cares? What good is it to try to play
the guitar differently, anyway? Indeed I think 90% of people would be
thrilled to play like Slash or John Frusciante. I think it comes down to
a fundamental choice: Do you want to be an entertainer? Or do you want
to be an artist? You can be both, of course. But which comes first?

I think the early Public Image Ltd albums rose to the level of art. And
truly unique art will reach into your heart and resonate with you in ways you
didn\'t know were even possible. This was the case for me when I first
discovered Public Image Ltd and Keith Levene\'s playing. It was the
winter of 2014. I was already out of college, and I had flown to Poland
to care for my dying grandfather. I couldn\'t tell you how I felt in my
own words. But you could hear how I felt if you listened to
\'Annalisa\', the driving, desperate fourth track on PiL\'s debut album
\'First Issue\'.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/CIgRQP4Fa-o" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Listen to the track once, and then listen to it again paying special
attention to the guitar. It\'s never in the \'right\' place. The note
choices are seemingly arbitrary. It sounds like Levene doesn\'t care.
And maybe on some level he didn\'t, at least not the way Jimmy Page
would. But clearly, Levene cared that he sounded like *that*. And
thirty-five years later it meant a hell of a lot to me, scared and
bewildered in the middle of the Polish winter. There are some
experiences so uniquely difficult that you\'re bound to feel alone, even
if you\'re surrounded by people you love. In my life, I\'ve found that
only art can close that gap. So I owe Levene a debt of gratitude.
Levene\'s tenure in the spotlight was relatively brief. Like so many
great artists he couldn\'t seem to have gotten out of his own way. I
hope he\'s at peace now.

Here are a few of my favorite Public Image Ltd tracks and clips:

## \'Public Image\', from *First Edition*

U2\'s The Edge took the chiming, expansive guitar sound from this track
and used it to build a global rock empire.


<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ylOCIP54PIQ" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>


## \'Poptones\', \'Careering\', shot for *The Old Grey Whistle Test*

Hendrix pioneered the effect you hear on the guitar here, the flanger.
Of course its use in a psychedelic context was trippy and ethereal.
Here, Levene turns his arpeggios into clouds that float by while you\'re
cradled by the bass and rhythm, until your attention is stolen by
Lydon\'s wailing.


<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/aDKDc5zq53k" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>


## \'The Flower of Romance\', from *The Flowers of Romance*

Levene wasn\'t only a guitar player. PiL\'s last album with Levene, *The
Flowers of Romance*, hardly had any guitar at all. Instead Levene and
Lydon went nuts with synths, stringed instruments, and tribal
percussion. The result is one of the strangest albums put out by a major
label. One of my favorites.


<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/bnF_TH57FA0" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>


## \'Poptones\', \'Careering\', shot for *American Bandstand*

Here\'s the \'Poptones\' and \'Careering\' combo again, this time for an
incredible TV appearance that broke down the line between performer and
artist.


<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/nIXBpwkvTUA" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/00fIPt-WARc" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

